[CHIMES]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard, and
this is "Mystery Teachings."
What is the significance
of the number three?
Why does it show up so
much, both in physics
and spirituality?
In this episode, we
explore the power of three,
its meaning, and importance in
making us who and what we are.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Nikola Tesla once
claimed, "If you only
knew the magnificence
of the 3, 6, and 9,
then you would have the
keys to the universe."
Each of these numbers,
three, six, and nine,
are perfectly
divisible by three.
Tesla truly believed
in the power of 3,
as evidenced by his life.
For example, he was known
to repeat everything
in sets of three.
And he would only stay in hotel
rooms with a number divisible
by three.
Was Tesla just being
superstitious or OCD,
or could he have been
purposefully tuning himself
in to the power of
three for good reason?
The number three
is considered very
sacred by spiritual traditions
throughout the world.
Whether it is seen as the holy
trinity, or the supernal triad,
or the archetypes of
father, mother, child,
or the sacred geometry
of the triangle,
the importance of
three is universal.
Not only is it spiritually
significant, the power of three
appears in science
again and again.
It relates to some of the most
important unanswered questions
in modern physics,
such as, why do
we live in three
dimensions of space?
And why are there
particles of matter
grouped into three generations
in the standard model?
Let's explore these
a bit more closely.
There's an
interesting phenomenon
that occurs with
particles of matter.
Each particle seems to come in
three versions or generations
of itself.
Each version has the same
charge, the same interactions
with the strong, weak, and
electromagnetic forces.
The only difference
that distinguishes them
is their mass.
For example, the other
versions of the electron
are the muon and
the tau particles.
Likewise, there are three types
of corresponding neutrinos.
Altogether, these form what
are called the six leptons.
Then there are also
six quarks that
are grouped into
three generations,
with the quarks
that are called up,
charm, and top being one set
and then the other three quarks,
called down,
strange, and bottom,
comprising the other set.
Altogether, these six
quarks and six leptons
are called the 12 fermions
that make up ordinary matter.
Again, the only real difference
in the three generations
of particles in a
particular set is the mass,
which is determined
by its interactions
with the Higgs field.
But that mass difference can be
quite large from one generation
to the next.
And the larger the
mass, the more energy it
takes to generate and
sustain that particle,
thus, the less stable it is.
In our universe
today, we primarily
find the lowest mass
generation of particles.
The heavier particles are
only created in high energy
collisions, like those found
in particle accelerators,
or due to cosmic
rays, or perhaps
during the time of the Big Bang.
But these heavier
particles very quickly
decay into their
lighter generations.
For example, the heavier quarks
generated in particle colliders
will decay into the
up and down quarks.
Now, why is all this important?
Well, in physics
today, they call
this process of particle decay a
flavor change or transmutation.
When we hear the word
transmutation or even change,
we should think of alchemy.
Alchemy is a natural process
that all things undergo
in order to transform
and transmute
from an unstable state to a more
stable or incorruptible state.
Here we are seeing alchemy at
work in the subatomic quantum
realm.
We might reflect upon
where we are out of balance
or unstable in our lives.
And what can we do to
alchemically transmute
those areas and bring
greater balance?
With that also
comes the question,
what do we need to let
decay or die in our lives
or in our thoughts in order to
allow the alchemy to progress?
If we look at our
society today, there
are many things out of balance.
Those things are created by
humans who are out of balance.
As humans, we are all connected.
We all share a collective mind.
So those imbalances
that we see in society
are also in each of us.
And the only thing we can
really change is ourselves.
When we see the
world as our mirror
and we take ownership of
what it is reflecting to us,
that is when we can
start making new choices
and taking new actions to
transform and transmute
from the inner to the outer to
bring balance and stability.
Now, how do we know
if we are progressing
in the alchemical process?
This is one of the beautiful
things about alchemy.
It gives us a clear roadmap
to the stages of progression.
To begin with, alchemy
talks about three phases.
This power of three shows
up a lot in alchemy.
And these three
phases are called
by the Latin terms nigredo,
albedo, and rubedo, which
refer to colors--
namely, the black phase, the
white phase, and the red phase.
In the black phase of
nigredo, it relates to a time
when we experience
maybe a dark night
of the soul or,
alternatively, a time
of needing to root out
impurities and imbalances.
Then the white phase
of albedo is a time
of purification and raising
vibration to connect to spirit
and then bringing that
higher energy back
to be embodied in the physical.
And then, finally, the
red phase of rubedo
is when we crystallize
or solidify
into a more complete,
integrated, and balanced form.
Just like a heavy
quark or lepton decays
from an unstable state
to an intermediate state
and then to a
final stable state,
we too are meant to transform
and transmute from nigredo
to albedo to rubedo.
And this is a cyclic
process, meaning
we don't just do it
once, but many times
in different aspects
of our lives,
until we eventually become more
whole, awakened, empowered,
and fully realized humans.
There is a science to
the alchemical process,
and there is also an art.
The art is in how we, as active
participants, learn to harness,
express, and work with
the laws of nature
in order to accelerate the
transformational cycles.
Examples of these laws of
nature that we can harness
are the seven
hermetic principles.
One of those
principles that really
applies to the power of three
is the principle of rhythm.
What is the principle of rhythm?
Well, it says, "Everything
flows, in and out.
Everything has its tides.
All things rise and fall.
The pendulum swing manifests
itself in everything.
The measure of the
swing to the right
is the same as the measure
of the swing to the left.
Rhythm compensates."
In other words,
things are constantly
oscillating between two poles,
and somewhere in the middle
is the balance point.
This principle of rhythm
shows up in everything,
from the macrocosm to the
microcosm, and in all realms,
whether they be of
mind, matter, or energy.
Now, in quantum
physics, one way we
see this principle
of rhythm show up
is in the behavior of neutrinos.
As we saw before, there are
three types or generations
of neutrinos.
But unlike the other particles
of the standard model,
neutrinos are very
light in mass,
at least 500,000 times
lighter than an electron.
And they only interact very
weakly with other particles.
Plus, the mass differences
between each type of neutrino
are also very tiny.
If they had no mass at all, then
all these types of neutrinos
would be physically identical.
And since their
masses are so small,
they don't decay like
heavier particles.
However, that little
bit of mass difference
allows neutrinos to
transform in another way.
They go through what are
called neutrino oscillations.
Now, what does that mean?
Well, it means that
any single neutrino
is a quantum superposition
of all three types.
As it travels
through space-time,
it oscillates from
one type to another.
Rather than a single
pendulum swinging,
we can imagine a neutrino
as three pendulums coupled
together, each with
slightly different mass.
Because of their
mass difference,
each pendulum swings at
slightly different rates.
This results in a periodic
transformation process,
where a neutrino might start
out as an electron neutrino.
Then as it travels,
it will become
a mixture of all three types.
And at some distant
point, if an observer
were to measure which
type of neutrino it is,
they might get an electron
type, a muon type,
or a tau type of neutrino.
As a personal aside, this is
one of the research projects
I worked on for several
years during my PhD studies
in physics.
At the time,
astrophysicists were
trying to understand the sun
and the particles it generated.
Some of the particles
predicted by the solar model
were electron type neutrinos.
But up to that point,
all neutrino detectors
were only observing one third to
half as many electron neutrinos
as predicted by the solar model.
Now, the Sudbury
Neutrino Observatory
was a collaboration
of over 100 physicists
from different universities,
geared towards solving
this solar neutrino problem.
It was designed using a
thousand tons of heavy deuterium
water submerged inside a
larger vessel of regular water,
all surrounded by 10,000
photomultiplier tubes
to detect the signals.
And this was then located
a mile underground
in a mine in Sudbury, Canada.
To say the least, it
was quite a process
getting to the actual
on-site laboratory.
We had to gear up
in miner's gear,
take a rickety elevator
down with the miners,
going one mile deep
into the Earth,
then walk over a mile through
dusty tunnels called The Drift.
Then once we
arrived at the site,
we had to clean up,
change into cleanroom
gear for our day of work.
And every now and
then, hearing popping
sounds of the Earth
shifting around
us, wondering in the
backs of our minds
if there might be a
collapse in the tunnels
or anything like that.
But fortunately, they never did.
And while I worked on the
project for four years,
I was happy to only have to
spend one summer on-site.
Anyhow, the Sudbury
Neutrino Observatory group
was able to verify that the
solar model was correct,
that neutrinos do oscillate.
And they were also able to
identify a more accurate range
of masses for the neutrinos.
What can we learn from
these neutrino oscillations?
How does this apply to us?
Well, for one thing,
we must realize that we
each have our own rhythm.
But when we are coupled
with other people,
such as in an
intimate relationship
or when working on
projects with colleagues,
we also need to be aware
that each person has
their own unique rhythm.
Not everyone is going to be
able to dance to our rhythm
all the time, even if we
are the boss or the alpha.
So we need to be flexible and
mix it up, allow our partners
to lead when their
rhythm is strong,
giving us a chance
to rest a bit.
And then, soon enough,
our turn to lead
will come again in the
proper flow and timing.
In addition to this,
we are complex people.
So how many rhythms do we
have happening simultaneously
within our lives?
We have many rhythms.
We have a biorhythm that is
tied to our day/night cycles,
as well as lunar
and solar cycles.
We also have emotional
rhythm, which
for women tends to be
tied to the moon phases
and for men is tied
to the sun phases.
Then we have mental rhythms.
There are times when we are
in high creativity phases
and other times of
low mental energy.
There's also the
rhythm of our spirit.
This one tends to flow on an
accelerating and expanding
scale, like a Fibonacci
spiral, rather than
a linear or circular
progression.
Many of our cultural
rhythms are based
on linear or circular flows.
But the rhythm and
progression of life
is meant to be ever-expanding
and accelerating,
like the golden spiral
and Fibonacci sequence.
When we are living in
sync with this rhythm,
that is when we will feel
fully alive and progressing
towards our full potential.
Many of us feel the
pressure of an accelerated
rhythm in our world today.
Things are happening so fast.
When we feel challenged to
keep up with today's rhythm,
it's partly because
we are clinging
to old programming and
ways of operating that
are linear or circular.
And the other reason is
because we just aren't
aware of our spirit's rhythm.
The shift in our
collective consciousness
is being driven by
the evolutionary leap
our spirit is striving towards.
And this is the rhythm we
need to attune our body, mind,
and soul to.
How do we shift our rhythm
to harness this principle?
First, we have to be aware
of our cycles and rhythms,
know when we are in a flow
versus when we are in an ebb.
Second, rather than fighting
it, learn to use it.
This only happens, though,
when we are prepared
for the pendulum to swing.
For example, many people these
days want to be in the flow
all the time.
That is not sustainable,
and it leads to burnout.
The principle of rhythm says
all things rise and fall.
After the flow
will come the ebb.
It is inevitable.
But by being
prepared for the ebb,
we can use it to rest, recover,
and take care of ourselves.
As we do, we will then be ready
to maximize upon the next flow
time.
And by resting during the
ebb rather than fighting it,
we will help support
our rhythm to shift
back into the flow faster.
Even better, though, is to
create our own rhythm that
accounts for both
ebb and flow, meaning
that we can purposefully
incorporate downtime
into our weekly schedule
to maintain balance.
This involves knowing our rhythm
and how much recovery time we
need to bounce back.
Is there anything more we can do
to master the effects of rhythm
in our lives?
Yes, there is.
Hermetic initiates have
methods of bringing themselves
to a balance point at will.
They have learned how to
use this principle of rhythm
rather than be used by it.
Typically, as this
principal says,
the degree to which
we swing one way
will be followed
by an equal degree
of swing the opposite way.
For example, if someone swings
into a high or elated state,
such as being happy
about some event,
that state is often
conditional and transient,
based on outer circumstances.
We can expect that, soon
enough, that same person
will be swinging to the
low or depressed state.
The degree of swing low will
match the degree of swing high.
This can make for an
emotional roller coaster.
Rather than seeking
the high, we should
be seeking the balance point and
to minimize the degree of swing
to one side or the other.
Hermeticists, Kabbalists,
and mystics all
have methods of establishing
and reinforcing balance
on a daily basis.
The Kabbalists call this
living in the middle pillar.
Such a life is one that is
full of joy, passion, purpose,
and constantly raising our
balance point to higher
levels of vibration.
Rather than seeking
feelings of happiness,
which are fleeting and
based on outer circumstances
or conditions, we
seek joy, which
is an inner state of being
that is our natural state when
we live in the middle pillar.
The swings of the
pendulum are what
pull us out of that calm,
peaceful, joyful center.
Thus, to master our
rhythm, we create
a lifestyle of balance and joy.
True balance is a very
dynamic state of being.
It is not static.
There is always movement
in some area of our life.
And we seek that movement.
Or another way of saying
it is we seek progression.
Instead of getting
stuck in a comfort zone,
we realize that magic,
miracles, and alchemy
happen outside the comfort zone.
Outside the comfort zone is
where the juice of life is.
Here, the rhythm is
exciting and vibrant.
Whereas, inside the comfort
zone, the rhythm of life
becomes like a
dull, constant march
that hypnotizes us into becoming
like sleepwalkers in life.
Through personal and
spiritual alchemy,
we can learn to
shift our balance
point to higher vibrations
and levels of attainment.
Living the middle
pillar involves
bringing the polar aspects of
ourselves into equilibrium.
First, we bring in equal amounts
of discipline and structure
on the one hand, balanced
with creativity and intuition
on the other.
Next is to bring into
balance the power
of the warrior with the love
and mercy of the healer.
And finally, the most
important balance
is that of masculine
and feminine energies
or aspects of creation.
These correlate with the
three horizontal bars
on the Kabbalistic tree of life.
Here, again, we see
the power of three.
Now, to scientists, this
reoccurring pattern of three
is puzzling.
They don't know how
to make sense of it.
But they admit it must be a clue
to something deeper, something
that lies beyond
ordinary physics.
Alchemists and Kabbalists,
on the other hand,
offer great insights
about why three.
Interestingly, all the particles
from the standard model
of physics could
be neatly arranged
on the three-dimensional
tree of life
to perhaps provide new
insights for scientists.
In this arrangement, the
12 particles of matter
are assigned to the four
outer pillars, each pillar
representing one set of
the three generations,
while the five
particles of force
that mediate
interactions of matter
are assigned to
the middle pillar.
Then through all of the
tree flows the light
of spirit from source.
What do the alchemists
have to say?
Well, according to
the ancient wisdom,
if we are to generate
anything new,
there must be both masculine
and feminine principles
working together.
Western alchemists call these
principles Sol and Luna,
or sometimes also
sulfur and salt.
And just like it takes both
a male seed and a female egg
to conceive a child, the
creative potentials of either
masculine or feminine alone
cannot accomplish anything
on their own.
They must be united together.
Their union creates
an animated seed
that combines both aspects
of masculine and feminine
into a third thing.
The alchemists call this
third essential mercury.
Only with all three
essentials do we have life.
It takes the union of
the two through a third
to generate anything
new or to allow
for transformation and
transmutation to take place.
One of the great alchemy
initiates of the West,
Peracelsus, said, 500
years ago, "All things
created by nature consist of
three primary elements, namely
natural mercury, sulfur,
and salt in combination.
Wherever corporal salt is
mixed with spiritual mercury
and animated sulfur
into one body,
then nature begins to work by
means of a separating fire."
These three essentials of
salt, sulfur, and mercury
are also found in the alchemical
traditions of the East
under different names.
In Ayurvedic alchemy, they're
called Kapha, Pitta, and Vata.
In Yogic alchemy, they're the
Ida, Pingala, and Sushumna.
In Daoist alchemy, they
are the Jing, Qi, and Shen.
Peracelsus also coined
the term spagyrics,
which means to draw out the
essence through a process
of separating and reassembling.
Through this process,
the essentials
are purified,
uplifted, and restored
to their original
eternal purity.
At first, these
three essentials are
bound up together
within any materia,
but that materia is polluted
or corrupted in some way.
To perform the alchemy,
they must first
be extracted or drawn out.
From this, they are carefully
separated and then purified.
This raises the vibration,
lifting the body up to spirit
and also drawing down the
spirit to become more embodied.
In this heightened
and enlivened state,
the three purified essentials
are then recombined and brought
to a stabilized
and perfected form.
But what are these three
essentials within us?
Hermes Trismegistus
says that they
are body, soul, and spirit.
Peracelsus clarifies that
mercury is the spirit,
sulfur is the soul,
and salt is the body.
Now, in today's
scientific terminology,
we could see them as mass for
the body, energy for the soul,
and light for the
spirit, such as we
see maybe in the three terms
of Einstein's famous equation,
E equals mc squared.
Or there's also Newton's second
law of motion, F equals m a,
where the three become mass,
force, and acceleration.
When we look at
these two equations,
we see that they
both relate to mass.
And recall, from earlier,
how quarks and leptons
and neutrinos can only
transform between generations
because they have mass.
If the mass is zero, then
there is no intrinsic energy
to physically transform with.
What does this tell us?
Well, one way we
could interpret this
is that bringing energy,
light, or spirit down
into material density
is necessary for
the transformational process.
This would agree with the
lines in the "Emerald Tablets"
of Hermes, where it
says, "The power of it
is integral, if it is
turned into Earth."
From a quantum
physics perspective,
we could also associate these
three essentials with matter,
as in fermions,
force, as in bosons,
and consciousness or will,
which the alchemists also
call the secret fire residing at
the center core of every atom.
These relate to the three
pillars of the Kabbalistic tree
of life.
The pillar on the left is
often called the pillar of form
and is seen as feminine.
The pillar on the right is
often called the pillar of force
and is seen as masculine, while
the middle pillar is called
the pillar of equilibrium,
where the two side
pillars of masculine
and feminine unite.
The various levels
of the middle pillar
often correlate with the will.
At the top is divine will.
In the center is the
will of the universe.
The second from the bottom
is our human collective will.
And the very bottom
is our body's will.
Not only are there three
pillars on the tree of life,
each of those has three spheres
on it above the physical.
A study of the tree's
structure reveals
that there are also three
main triads and three
horizontal cross bars.
And the Kabbalistic book,
the "Sefer Yetzirah,"
also talks about there
being three mother letters--
aleph, mem, and shin.
Clearly, the power
of three is well
recognized by the Kabbalists.
Kabbalah teaches
us that only when
the third aspect came in
could the universe be created.
There must be a source
of all light, which
is represented by the apex of
the tree, called the crown.
Then that light must
be expanded out.
This outward reaching force
is the masculine aspect
of creation.
It is the emanation from
the source, called wisdom.
But if that power is to be
harnessed in order to bring
anything into
formation, there must
be a third aspect that
draws the light inward
to be embodied in form.
This inward movement
towards form
is the feminine aspect of
creation, called understanding.
It completes the upper triad,
or the first sacred geometry
of the triangle.
From these, the three
pillars are also established,
as the rest of the tree
is formed according
to this original pattern.
But only when we have three
aspects can form be generated.
So the power of three is
necessary for light or spirit
to come into the physical, where
it can transform and evolve.
What is spirit or light
trying to transform into?
Well, alchemists,
of course, talk
about the philosopher's stone.
And there are many
interpretations
of what that is, because alchemy
can be applied in many ways.
The Kabbalists have a vision of
becoming the Adam Kadmon, which
translates as the godlike
or perfected human.
Adam Kadmon is said to be a
perfectly unified light body,
where the three aspects
of body, soul, and spirit
have all been
transformed, transmuted,
and unified into one
immortal being of light.
Tibetan Buddhism
has a similar level
of realization they
call the rainbow body,
or Dzogchen, the
great perfection.
How is such a state of
perfection accomplished?
It is something that happens
only in the physical.
It can be attained
from devoting oneself
to the spiritual and
internal alchemy process.
Our bodies literally
are alchemical vessels
that produce all manner
of transformations.
Our mind and soul must also go
through the alchemical process,
as these are the mediator
between spirit and body.
Peracelsus says the soul "unites
the two contraries, the body
and the spirit, and changes
them into one essence."
What does this tell us?
Well, alchemy works
through the interplay
of these three essentials
uniting to become one essence.
It also tells us that if we want
to unite our body and spirit so
that we can fulfill
our potential
and create a better life, we
must do so through the soul.
Why the soul?
Remember, the soul is the
operating system and interface
that allows our eternal
spirit to interact
with the physical body.
The soul mediates the high
vibrational energies of spirit
and filters it so that the
body can handle and utilize
the energy at this level.
It also translates the signals
and energy from the body
back up to spirit.
But our soul's
operating system can
become corrupted by faulty
programming or unhealed
traumas that lead to
glitches in the system.
For example, we know
a lot about our bodies
and what it takes to
live a healthy life,
but what stops us?
Why don't we do what we
know is needed to thrive?
Well, our mental patterns,
our emotional attachments,
our habits, our subconscious
sabotage mechanisms,
our belief systems, and other
ways we block ourselves.
In other words,
it's the programs
that cause our soul not
to function properly
and disrupts the energy
flow of our good intentions.
These faulty programs
and indoctrinations
that corrupt our soul
are things we have
learned from the outer world.
They are not true to our spirit.
To correct this, we need to
purify, debug, and upgrade
the operating system of our soul
if we want to make progress.
Yet, so many people are so
focused on the outer world.
They think that we have
to change the outer first.
But the outer is a
manifestation of the inner.
We need to change
the inner first.
For example, the problems
we see in the outer world,
like war, poverty,
inequality, and so forth,
are manifestations of the
issues we have inside of us.
We are at odds with ourselves.
We feel lack and
not enough inside.
We treat ourselves unfairly,
often being our own worst
critic, and so on.
This is all because of
the faulty programming
and misalignment of our soul.
How do we reprogram
and transform our soul?
Well, there are many
methods and practices,
from Tibetan, Yogic,
Daoist, Kabbalistic,
and other mystery
school traditions
that are all helpful.
These practices are
geared towards learning
to harness this alchemy within
the body, mind, and soul.
For example,
meditation is great,
because it helps us quiet the
mind and find peace within.
But that is just one aspect.
We also need to
reprogram and reorient
our mental and
emotional constructs.
We need to truly
heal and transform,
reminding our soul
of who we really are
as a spirit of love and light.
We need to rectify the
faulty programs of our soul.
To work on the soul is
to work on the depth.
If we return to the analogy of
a computer operating system,
and it gets infected
by a virus or malware,
we have three options.
One, we can erase
the whole system
and start with a new one.
Two, find an expert who
knows how to fix it.
Or three, learn the
programming language ourselves.
When it comes to
the soul, option one
really isn't an option.
So we are left with
options two and three.
Also, with regards to the soul,
all healing is self-healing.
We can hire an expert to help
us, such as a skilled healer.
But ultimately, we
are the ones who
have to go into the depth to
heal and transform ourselves.
Any good healer
of integrity will
say that their job is to
simply facilitate and guide
the process, to
help us speed it up,
but we have to be ready to
receive and do the work.
And when we want to get really
good at self-transforming,
we must work even more
to attain self mastery.
This means we have to
learn the programming
language of the soul
so that we can address
any internal issues as needed.
It means we dive into
understanding our operating
system and move
beyond just working
the feel-good applications.
This is where people who
live the tools of Kabbalah
and walk a path of initiation
in the mysteries really thrive.
On the Kabbalistic tree
of life, the top triad
represents spirit,
while the bottom sphere
represents the body.
Everything else in
between is the soul.
As we ascend the
tree of life, we
discover the intricate
workings of our soul
and learn how to
debug and reprogram
each module of our
soul's operating system.
Kabbalah is like an
owner's manual to life
and shows us how to optimize the
functions of our mind and soul
so that we can live
our full potential.
It brings us the
deeper knowledge
that we need to come to a
greater understanding of how
we transform ourselves.
When we become more self-aware,
we can then more easily
recognize what life is
trying to reflect to us.
As such, ascending
the tree of life
becomes a very accelerated
process to up-leveling
how our soul is operating.
It is a form of
spiritual alchemy.
When we realign our soul to our
spirit, everything in our life
flows better, and we are able
to create a life we love.
And for those who truly want
to achieve their full potential
and become a fully awakened
and perfected human,
there is a path that
can lead us there.
It is an alchemical
path that takes us
through all the stages, from
nigredo to albedo to rubedo.
And it continues on
through however many cycles
of this process as are
needed to raise our vibration
to that highest level, until we
eventually recombine our three
essentials of spirit, soul, and
body into one indestructible
whole, combining within us
the powers of above and below
until we become the
philosopher's stone, the Adam
Kadmon, the rainbow body.
Join me again as
we explore deeper
into the secret
fire of alchemists
and discover how we can control
the atoms of our bodies.
I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard.
Thank you for
exploring the mysteries
of the universe with me in this
episode of "Mystery Teachings."
[MUSIC PLAYING]